Hi everyone, my name is Alex Farach. Welcome to Let's Start at the Beginning, Bits to Character
Encoding in R. I'm a data scientist and analytics manager at Accenture Federal Services. I spend
a lot of time thinking about R, NLP, data viz, and statistical learning. My most recent
work is on the Hugging Face R package to bring hugging face models and tools to R. So how
would you describe the letter A to a computer? Today, I'll discuss how. In doing so, we'll
get into the shallow end of a deep pool known as bits to character encoding. And we'll talk
a little bit about what that looks like in R. So what do we mean by bits to character
encoding, especially in relationship to NLP? Well, computers don't speak the same language
as we do. If we want to use computers as a process language, we need some way to encode
language so that computers understand and vice versa. Both the encoding and decoding
process needs to be identical on both ends or the human computer translation falls apart.
The agreed upon method is called a protocol. So back to the question, how would you describe
the letter A to a computer? Oh, we do so by using numbers, of course, to represent letters.
So instead of A, we could have one, B could be two, and so on. We assign a number to represent
each unique character or symbol we want to communicate. Computer store numbers in binary,
and all signals inside a computer have two possible values, zero or one. Each of the
zero one pieces of information are called bits. One bit can represent two value, two bits can
represent four, three bits represent eight, and so on. So how many bits is needed to represent
256 values? Using the logic just discussed, it's eight bits. When computers were first developed,
the decision was made that a byte was the next standard unit above a bit. A byte is defined as
eight bits. In the 1960s, computer developers had one byte to work with. They developed a
protocol to fit into this one byte called ASCII. This protocol can assign a unique number to all
letters in the English language, plus numbers, symbols, and control characters. Everything fits
into this one byte budget, and even better, seven of the available eight bits were needed.
Over time, the need to fit more information grew larger, but luckily, there was that extra bit to
work with. Things got standardized into Latin one, which uses a full eight bits available in
the single byte. So then after that, a new standard was developed, UTF-8. Each character in UTF-8 is
represented using a prefix U followed by a four digit hexadecimal number. The difference between
binary and hexadecimal numbers are out of scope for this brief talk. What's important to note
here though is that UTF-8 converts a code point or a single character in Unicode into a set of one
to four bytes and can encode all one million plus Unicode code points. Character strings in R can
be encoded in Latin one, UTF-8, or as raw bytes. These declarations can be read or changed using
the encoding function. The concept of native encoding is important here. Natively encoded
strings are strings written in whatever code page the user is using. As of the 4.2.0 release, R uses
UTF-8 as the native encoding. Prior to this release, that was not the case because Windows
versions prior to Windows 10 didn't allow it. Post Windows 10, this was allowed and R was updated to
take advantage of this feature. This is an exciting change for us focusing on NLP and R since it
mitigates a lot of potential problems for common NLP tasks. It's also helpful to keep this in mind
when using common functions like read.csv where character encoding can be set. On Linux and
macOS, the native encoding has been UTF-8 so this isn't an issue there. Native encoding is why we
see unknown here as well. For example, we see coffee as unknown even though it's clearly ASCII
compliant. ASCII strings will never be marked with a declared encoding since their representation
is the same in all supported encodings. The sys.getlocal function will tell you what your
native encoding is. The localization information function is another helpful function. And lastly,
we have the iconvert function which uses system facilities to convert a character vector between
encodings. So how does a tidyverse tackle encoding? We turn to the stringer library which is built on
top of the extensive, excuse me, stringy package. We can specify the encoding of a string with the
string convert function and for fun let's create a little function here that applies a random
encoding via the stringiStringEncodeList function. And that's it. Thanks for hanging out with me.